Experiment No. 1

Study of Networking
Commands

Introduction to Networking commands -
The operating system consists of various built-in, command-line networking utilities that are 
used for network troubleshooting. We will see various networking commands which are most 
essentials for every network administrator.

1. Ping
Ping is used to testing a network host capacity to interact with another host. Just enter the command 
Ping, followed by the target host’s name or IP address. The ping utilities seem to be the most common 
network tool. This is performed by using the Internet Control Message Protocol, which allows the echo 
packet to be sent to the destination host and a listening mechanism. If the destination host reply to the 
requesting host, that means the host is reachable. This utility usually gives a basic image of where there 
may be a specific networking issue,
For Example: If an Internet connection is not in the office, for instance, the ping utility is used to 
determine if the problem exists in the office or the Internet provider’s network. The following shows an 
image of how ping tools to obtain the locally connected router’s connectivity status.

2. NetStat
Netstat is a Common TCP – IP networking command-line method present in most Windows, Linux, 
UNIX, and other operating systems. The netstat provides the statistics and information in the use of the 
current TCP-IP Connection network about the protocol.
There are various options a user can use with the Netstat command.
Options are as follows-
 -a: This will display all connection and ports
 -b: Shows the executable involved in each connection or hearing port
 -e: This protocol will combine with the -sand display the ethernet statistics
 -n: This will display the address and the port number in the form of numerical
 -o: It will display the ID of each connection for the ownership process.
 -r: It will display the routing table
 -v: When used in combination with -b, the link or hearing port sequence for every executable is 
shown. 

3. Ip Config
The command IP config will display basic details about the device’s IP address configuration. Just type 
IP config in the Windows prompt and the IP, subnet mask and default gateway that the current device 
will be presented. If you have to see full information, then type on command prompt config-all and 
then you will see full information. There are also choices to assist you in resolving DNS and DHCP issues.

4. Hostname
To communicate with each and other, the computer needs a unique address. A hostname can be 
alphabetic or alphanumeric and contain specific symbols used specifically to define a specific node or 
device in the network. For example, a hostname should have a domain name (TLD) of the top-level and 
a distance between one and 63 characters when used in a domain name system (DNS) or on the 
Internet.

5. Tracert
The tracert command is a Command Prompt command which is used to get the network packet being 
sent and received and the number of hops required for that packet to reach to target. This command 
can also be referred to as a traceroute. It provides several details about the path that a packet takes 
from the source to the specified destination.
The tracert command is available for the Command Prompt in all Windows operating systems.
The syntax for Tracert Command
tracert [-d] [-h MaxHops] [-w TimeOut] target
There are various options the user can use with tracert command.
Options for tracert Command are as follows-
 target: This is the destination, either an IP address or hostname.
 –d: This option prevents Tracert from resolving IP addresses to hostnames to get faster results.
 -h MaxHops: This Tracert option specifies the maximum number of hops in the search for the 
target. If the MaxHops option is not specified the target has not been found by 30 hops, then 
the tracert command will stop looking.
 -w timeout: A timeout value must be specified while executing this ping command. It adjusts 
the amount of time in milliseconds. 

6. Nslookup
The Nslookup, which stands for name server lookup command, is a network utility command used to 
obtain information about internet servers. It provides name server information for the DNS (Domain 
Name System), i.e. the default DNS server’s name and IP Address.
The syntax for Nslookup is as follows.
Nslookup
or
Nslookup [domain_name]

7. Route
In IP networks, routing tables are used to direct packets from one subnet to another. The Route 
command provides the device’s routing tables. To get this result, just type route print. The Route 
command returns the routing table, and the user can make changes by Commands such as Route Add, 
Route Delete, and Route Change, which allows modifying the routing table as a requirement.

8. ARP
ARP stands for Address Resolution Protocol. Although network communications can readily be thought 
of as an IP address, the packet delivery depends ultimately on the media access control (MAC). This is 
where the protocol for address resolution comes into effect. You can add the remote host IP address, 
which is an arp -a command, in case you have issues to communicate with a given host. The ARP 
command provides information like Address, Flags, Mask, IFace, Hardware Type, Hardware Address, 
etc.

9. Path Ping
We discussed the Ping command and the Tracert command. There are similarities between these 
commands. The pathping command which provides a combination of the best aspects of Tracert and 
Ping.
This command takes 300 seconds to gather statistics and then returns reports on latency and packet 
loss statistics at intermediate hops between the source and the target in more detail than those reports 
provided by Ping or Tracert commands.
The syntax for path ping is as follows:
path ping [-n] [-h] [-g <Hostlist>] [-p <Period>] [-q <NumQueries> [-
w <timeout>] [-i <IPaddress>] [-4 <IPv4>] [-6 <IPv6>][<TargetName>]
 N: Prevents path ping functioning from attempting to resolve routers’ IP addresses to their 
names.
 -h MaxHops: This tracert option specifies the maximum number of hops in the search for the 
target. If the MaxHops option is not specified the target has not been found by 30 hops then 
the tracert command will stop looking.
 -w timeout: A timeout value must be specified while executing this ping command. It adjusts 
the amount of time in milliseconds.
 -ip <IPaddress>: Indicates the source address.
 target: This is the destination IP address or a hostname user want to ping.

We could also focus on the networking architectures in which these types of networks can
be implemented:

1. PEER-TO-PEER NETWORKING – which might be implemented in a workgroup
consisting of computers running Microsoft Windows 98 or Windows 2000
Professional;

2. SERVER-BASED NETWORKING – which might be based on the domain model of
Microsoft Windows NT, the domain trees and forests of Active Directory in Windows
2000, or another architecture such as Novell Directory Services (NDS) for Novell
NetWare;

3. TERMINAL-BASED NETWORKING – which might be the traditional host-based
mainframe environment; the UNIX X Windows environment; the terminal services of
Windows NT 4, Server Enterprise Edition; Windows 2000 Advanced Server; or Citrix
MetaFrame.

Conclusion: so, in this way we studied the basics of networking commands.
